Copyright (C) 2002, 2003, 2004, 2006 Rocky Bernstein.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1 or
@ifset DEBIANHASBECOMEREASONABLE
@c From Matthias Klose <doko@debian.org> a Debian maintainer on
@c Sat, 23 Aug 2003 14:24:44 +0200
@c
@c  I personally see the invariant sections as the thing in the
@c  GFDL, which hinders me in uploading the package to the archives.
@c  I don't have any problem, if some other Debian developer makes a
@c  bashdb package built from separate sources.
@c
@c  I am aware that Debian ships other packages containing documentation
@c  covered by the GFDL (and one of them for which I do the packaging as
@c  well), but I won't add a new package, which I maintain. So before an
@c  upload of a bashdb package built from the bash sources either
@c
@c
@c  - Debian has a position on the GFDL, which allows inclusion
@c
@c  - the bashdb manual does not have invariant sections, or is
@c    relicensed, or dual licensed.
@c
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with the
Invariant Sections being ``Free Software'' and ``Free Software Needs
Free Documentation'', with the Front-Cover Texts being ``A GNU
Manual,'' and with the Back-Cover Texts as in (a) below.

(a) The Free Software Foundation's Back-Cover Text is: ``You have
freedom to copy and modify this GNU Manual, like GNU software.  Copies
published by the Free Software Foundation raise funds for GNU
development.''
@end ifset
@ifclear DEBIANHASBECOMEREASONABLE
any later version published by the Free Software Foundation; with no
Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
@end ifclear

